you're arming the pakistanis whom do you
think they're going to shoot it'll be us
that pact poisoned us relations with
India for the duration of the Cold War
Putin is dumping all his ordinance on
Ukraine he is leaving Siberia open it's
not the question of whether the she
Putin Bromance is going to end it's when
pay attention to what dictators say
because they've got to communicate at
some level to their own populations they
quite often tell you exactly what they
want to do and you think that's insane
who would do that well well hello hello
I need to start with a disclaimer cuz I
work for the US government and they
require you to do a disclaimer so the
ideas that you're about to hear are my
ideas they don't necessarily represent
those of the US government the US Navy
Department the US Department of Defense
let alone the naval war College where I
work are we all good on this all right
so today I'm going to tell you a story
of three
protagonists Russia the United States
and China that wanted to work their
magic on India and Pakistan which didn't
exactly appreciate it so two big topics
one is intervening in someone else's
problems a cottage industry for the
United States and also before you do
that you really ought to check out the
alignments who's the primary adversary
of whom how long has it been that way
and also ask these questions about all
the neighbors and anyone who might want
to crash the party along with you it's
also a story of a series of limited Wars
what's a limited War it means it's there
something less than regime change so
however it turns out the governments
that started that war are still in place
and two of them resulted in quick
victories the ideal and warfare the
first one was the uh Sino Indian War of
1962 and the other one was the
Bangladesh war of independence in
1971 and and these wars change things in
many short-term expected ways and then
in many long-term highly unexpected ways
so here's the my game plan and it's
literally a game plan I'm going to start
out with the pivotal decisions made by
different players that then once they're
made uh certain things are foreclosed
and certain things are possible and this
is the playing field that's still
limited by these pivotal decisions and
then I'm going to look at the teams uh
some allies were Prime allies others
were subprime and and they mixed and
matched over time so then I'll do teams
and then I'll do the game the
interaction and then at the end I'm
going to do the plays some of the
techniques and things that you can do to
play this game pivotal decision number
one when Mao won the Chinese Civil War
in 19 49 it didn't end he also spent the
next two years not only eliminating
nationalist remnants but also conquering
shinjang and Tibet Tibet had been
autonomous since 19011 when the last
Dynasty had collapsed and Ma decides
that he is going to reconquer Tabet
Tat's an interesting place it contains I
think about 40% of China's mineral
resources so there's a lot of money be
made in Tibet for those with the capital
to invest in big mines if you look at
this map the Han Chinese the
preponderant group of China they inhabit
they dominate as far west as the
Chongqing Basin in Sichuan China has put
large armies into Tibet exactly twice
once under the chenlong emperor in the
late 18th century and they didn't stay
for very long and then under ma in 1950
and they have stayed forever and built
roads so they could keep on sending more
in between 1950 and 1957 China built a
series of Road systems through Tibet and
the Western route there is the only one
that provides year round traffic the
problem with uh the other two is well
check it out they go through 14 or 15
Mountain rang you means you go vertical
up vertical down do that 14 15 times and
then between Monsoon rains and snow and
mudslides they're very difficult to
maintain and then the Eastern one
crosses the major roads uh river systems
of South Asia so that's difficult so
only the Western route is the really
good one and it's really important for
the Chinese if you want to conquer Tibet
you truly want that one all right so if
you look at this that Western route
provides not only the ability to control
Tibet but it also provides a pincer on
shinjang if China wants to come in one
way and the other way it's a good way to
get in if you look on those two circles
there those are the disputed areas
between China and India the northern one
is the oxy chin Plateau which China has
taken from India and India still claims
and in the south is the arunachal
Pradesh which India still owns but China
claims so these are the the areas that
they're uh fighting over but once China
took
Tibet before there had been a big buffer
zone between China and India right
there's all this Tibet and no one could
really get in there now China's built
roads so it can get into places where
India cannot deploy troops until it gets
into the road races with the Chinese and
so it reduces the the buffer zone
between China and India to these small
Himalayan kingdoms of Nepal Bhutan and
siim so it changes things so so that's
pivotal decision number one decided to
conquer Tibet pivotal decision number
two is the United States in order to
deal with the Soviet unions under
Eisenhower did what the wits back in the
day called P domania what is that it's
forming all sorts of bilateral relations
and also Regional groupings in order to
counter the Soviets institutionally inal
them in that way and part of this was um
what was called the Northern Tier
strategy as seen in the Baghdad pact
where you get turkey Iraq Iran and
Pakistan to form this thing and it's to
wall off the Soviet Union from the oil
fields of the Middle East and the other
thing you should look at this map before
it goes away look where Pakistan's
located where you think it is and then
go to the East and that's East Pakistan
in the 1971 War uh there's going be a
Civil War and Pakistan's going to lose
East Pakistan which is Bangladesh today
so just keep that in mind so what as
part of the sweetener for Pakistan to
join the Baghdad pact the United States
allied with Pakistan and gave them a a
big military
Aid treaty and here's nou the uh prime
minister of India and he is horrified a
military pack between Pakistan and the
United States changes the whole balance
of power in this part of the world
affects us most especially the United
States must realize that the reaction of
India is going to be you're arming the
pakistanis whom do you think they're
going to shoot it'll be us and the
Indians were just appalled that we did
this and um afterwards Eisenhower
admitted it was perhaps the worst kind
of plan and decision we could ever have
made it was a terrible error but now
we're stuck with it because what the
United States is slowly discovering is
that if you arm either India or Pakistan
in this uh period it's going to aim it
at the other one and so that pack
poisoned us relations with India for the
duration of the Cold War and set up
things in ways the United States
ultimately wasn't happy with okay those
are two pivotal decisions now for a
pivotal situation it's really the
devolving situation between Russia and
China until Mal got uh Atomic weapons in
1964 he really had to shut up and he
because he needed Russian uh
technological Aid he's been totally cut
off from the West after the Korean War
he's been uh isolated so he truly needs
a Soviet Aid and he also if he wants
nuclear weapons he needs some of their
aid to do that as well so he has to keep
his mouth shut but once he detonates an
atomic weapon here's what he tells the
Russians and they just about lose it uh
there are too many places occupied by
the Soviet Union the Russians took
everything they could we have not yet
presented account of this list under the
Zars the Russians took from the Chinese
sphere of influence territory exceeding
us east of the Mississippi I think the
Chinese didn't notice yes they noticed
so Mao all of a sudden is calling that
and the Russians are appalled but Ma has
other gripes against the Russians Stalin
in uh and the leadup to World War II had
made sure to set up the Chinese to fight
Japan so that he wouldn't have to so
that leaves him just fighting Nazis not
alone not Nazis and Japanese and then uh
Stalin takes Mongolia which had formerly
been a part of the Chinese sphere of
influence and then the Korean War he's
more than happy to fight to the last
Chinese and then during the Chinese
Civil War the Russians tell her uh ma oh
stop yangi you need to take a little
breather here because he wants a divided
China like the divided Germany he has
and then the divided Korea he's going to
get you want to be surrounded by these
little broken states around you if you
were a continental power and then when
Stalin dies and uh ma wants to be senior
Statesman of Communism kushto is
appalled by that then Mao is appall when
Kush does d stalinization because Mao
has its own cult of personality and then
kof wants to do peaceful coexistence
with the West while Mao is ramping it up
in the cultural revolution so there's no
meeting of the minds and then all this
becomes very uh public when it hits the
propaganda press of the Communists of
the sinos Soviet split in 1960 all right
the Russians have their own gripes about
the Chinese and here's how they
go um the Russians look around at the
west and PR the United States and go wow
they got bases everywhere the British
have got bases everywhere how come our
allies won't give us bases I mean well
if you occupy Eastern Europe the whole
place is a base but that's a different
matter uh so the the Russians want the
Chinese to let them keep a couple of
remaining zaris treaty ports essentially
uh and uh wants to expand them and the
Chinese say forget it and in fact after
the Korean War when the Chinese have
troops all up in Manchuria which is
where these bases were located and
there's a succession struggle going on C
Stalin's just died the Russians have to
return the bases because there's just
too much bad stuff happening where they
live and then what Ma does in 54 and 58
uh which just appalls the Russians are
these two Taiwanese straight crisis
what's going on Mao is lobbing uh all
kinds of ordinance
on these islands that are owned by
Taiwan that are very close to the
People's Republic Shores and the
Russians are appalled they are not
consulted and yet they have a friendship
treaty that obligates them to provide to
join a war under certain circumstances
and the Russians are going whoa whoa
whoa whoa there could be nuclear follow
on from this stuff so uh the Russians
then ask the Chinese if it's okay if
they have a combined Naval Base on
China's Shores and China says forget it
the Russians are thinking okay well then
we're not going to give you any of the
plans for the atomic weapon and it all
devolves so there's no love lost on
either side and then what exacerbates
these tensions is the Vietnam War uh
where China wants influence over
neighbor Vietnam that is pretty typical
but Russia wants influence over Vietnam
to do a pincer on China which China
doesn't like at all meanwhile both of
them want to prove their revolutionary
credentials by aiding the Vietnamese
North Vietnamese so Russia's aid needs
to come by train over China lest the
United States sink at the the good stuff
if it goes by sea so um the Chinese feel
obliged to let it go through but they're
just hassling Russians the whole all the
whole time through they they take it
apart tear it apart say it was from
China and the Russians are just
apoplectic so their relations are
getting worse and worse and worse and
and the squabbling is just incessant so
it's not surprising that the sinos
Soviet border war of 1969 breaks out
during the Vietnam
war and while all this is going on this
is the one of the River Islands the
Amore river forms much of their border
and this is one of the islands there and
there's much fighting over it and the
Russians come to us the Americans and
say uh is it okay if we nuke these
people and the United States no there's
no way it's okay to Nuke these people
and Ma figures it out the one that wants
to Nuke you that's the primary adversary
so prior to that moment the United
States is the primary adversary of both
Russia and China
now with this they're primary
adversaries of each other it causes a
reshuffling of the allies and I'll get
to that later so okay I've done the
playing field of these decisions that
delimitate delimited it but now I'm
going to get to the allies and some
allies are better than others and here
we got Ma and Cru sha look at these love
birds boy when that divorce took place
boy did it mess up the extended family
never mind um and the point for my
purpose is tonight when I I'm going to
use the word Alliance really Loosely if
you sign a mutual defense pact for my
purposes tonight that makes you an
alliance uh allies and if you're a
political scientist you got something's
much more complicated but forget it I
just can't handle it so we're going to
do it this way all right so um Stalin
didn't think much of nou at all he
thought he was a Lackey of British
colonialism but kusov thought India was
really important to counterbalance uh
China and here's nou thinking about it
we have to be on friendly terms with
both Russia and America but actually he
felt much more in common with Russia why
because uh he favored faan socialist uh
economic uh policies that were much more
akin to what's going on in Russia than
it was in the United States moreover the
United States was segregated and um
which appalled nou and in addition the
United States was coing up to all the
colonial Powers so NE Ru thought the
Russians were the better but while all
this is going on the Indians were
non-aligned and they treated the Chinese
really generously and I've got a whole
list of generosity so India immediately
recognizes China in 1950 countries like
the United States didn't forever and um
when the San Francisco treaty I think it
signed 1951 in the United States ending
the war with Japan uh India refuses to
sign because China and Russia aren't
there to sign as well and then to help
China break out of its diplomatic
isolation at the end of the Korean War
India signs a friendship treaty with
China and as part of that friendship
treaty it recognizes Chinese sovereignty
over Tibet under international law
contrary to what Vladimir Putin is doing
lately under international law if you
recognize someone's sovereignty over
territory that is permanent you cannot
back out of it legally under
international law so um the r the
Chinese promise I don't know there's
something like peaceful coexistence or
whatever they're promising the the
Indians but that has no permanence under
international law where whereas this
thing does and then uh from 1960 on the
Indians are voting to seat the People's
Republic of China not Taiwan on the UN
meanwhile in the background all this
road building is going on those roads
are being built between 1950 and
1957 and the the Indians aren't going to
figure out until 1958 that the roads are
there meanwhile roads complete
the um Russ the Chinese want to complete
their uh control over Tibet and so
they're going to send big armies up
there and Tibetan culture is much more
it's of Indian origin it's not Chinese
origin so this repression of Tibetan
culture just appalls the Indians and
then two days before the people's
liberation of army is going to make it
into Lassa which is the capital of Tibet
the Dalai Lama Fleet he's the spiritual
leader of Tibet he flees to India where
he's remained ever since to the absolute
horror and anger of China so at about
this time the Chinese come to the
Indians and say look why don't we do a
swap on sovereignty you recognize our
sovereignty over that axai chin Plateau
where nobody lives but it's really good
for the roads for China's Western route
and then we'll recognize your
sovereignty over this much more densely
populated arunachal Pradesh and Neu
doesn't want to hear anything about it
so during the Cuban Missile Crisis when
Russia is much too busy Waring about
whether who's going to be lobbing nukes
at home this is when China launches and
in the 1960 Sino Indian War and China
just take plain takes the oxide chin uh
Plateau the Indians are appalled because
they don't have any roads to be able to
deploy up there whereas the Chinese do
their defeat is just total and they
can't believe the Chinese did this to
them here's n afterwards there are not
many instances in history where one
country that is India has gone out of
her way to be friendly and Cooperative
with the Chinese government and people
and plead their cause in the councils of
the world and then the for the Chinese
government to return evil for good and
even to go to the extent of committing
aggression and invade our sacred land
who does this so I get it the Chinese
get the territory they want that was the
goal of that war but what they have done
is Tak a country India which had his
leadership terribly idealistic not
interested in becoming militarized at
all and making them angry forever uh mil
India immediately doubles the size of
its Army to within the next 10 years to
up to 750,000 people creates 10 Mountain
divisions useful against China and uh
they've never ceased being so angry and
then if you think about this what if
instead of playing this game this way ch
China and India had teamed
up uh I would suspect we would be in a
completely very different world order
now if that is what they' done instead
uh but this is China's decision not
India's fault on this one all right so
um that wasn't great so let's check out
other possibilities once um that happens
to India India is all of a sudden
looking for Russia to counterbalance
China and um you also have uh um
Pakistan wondering what's going what to
do and what the Pakistani notice after
all this well the Chinese are not going
to be teaming up with India right
they've just invaded the place and so
this is when Pakistan sees that China
might have real possibilities as an ally
and uh B is going to play the China card
for the nuclear chip trying to get um
Chinese help for all of that and here's
what happens so you have the 62 war and
then in 1963 Pakistan really
inexplicably a seeding territory to
China who does that and there are
various possibilities but I'm surmising
it's because it's going to be help on
nuclear development that that would
explain why you would give a lot of
territory but we don't know there was
supposed to be some mutual defense pack
maybe and there's some other things
going on anyway you can imagine what it
may or may not have been okay in the
case of Pakistan and China and India and
Russia they had quite a a good
relationship because uh the pakistanis
and the Chinese shared India as a as
their problem and the Russians and the
Indians shared China as their problem
and that worked pretty well but the
United States was just a disaster from
both Indian and um Pakistani point of
view and vice versa because the United
States wanted to befriend both of them
but if you befriend one the other is
appalled and so the United States wound
up appalling everybody and so what the
United States wanted to have happen is
for India and Pakistan to put aside
their differences and then combine
against China and stop communism from
spreading India and Pakistan want to use
the United States for maximum Aid to use
against the other which is a nonstarter
for the United States and then Pakistan
really would like it if the United
States would um be nice with China as
well because Pakistan wants to have good
relations with the United States and
China and that's a nonstarter for the
United States until um
1971 when there are secret visits and
things going it's later on okay so in
1962 India gets trounced in this war
with China they look like they're
militarily feckless and then in 1964 Neu
dies right he'd been um the head of
India since independence in 1947 he'd
been there a long time so he's dead so
1965 if you're Pakistani looks like a
good year to settle border problems and
so what they do is first they invade
through the South if you look way down
at the bottom there the ruch and that
seems to go pretty well and then then
they decide they want to go for the
thing they really care about which is
Kashmir and they do that well the enemy
gets the vote and the Indians invaded
straight through lore which isn't
remotely what the pakistanis had in mind
and then the United States uh does a
double arms embargo on both of them for
doing this and the problem is the
pakistanis are much more dependent on US
military aid the Indians that were more
Diversified so they just didn't have uh
enough spare parts to continue this
thing uh so it's a very uh unhappy event
for them they they lose it and um what
happens neither the United States nor
Russia wants either one of them fighting
that war um the Russians are thinking we
want the military aid to go to India in
order to counterbalance counterbalance
China not to decimate the pakistanis and
the United States doesn't want it either
so the United States is very happy that
the Soviets broker the Tashkent
declaration that ends this war but Pak
is um worse off after this thing is and
and India has restored its reputation
for knowing what it's doing um on the
battlefield
so um for
Pakistan uh the United States is really
problematic because we're interested in
being nice to them when we want
something out of them and then we're not
so interested when we don't want
something out of them because we don't
share a primary enemy so what we really
wanted we listening bases um the
technology of the day uh was such that
if you want to surveil the Soviet Union
you want to send these big YouTube
planes over and given their ranges and
you're not supposed to be doing it and
so uh we had you two bases I think
Norway West Germany turkey Pakistan and
then Japan and in addition we had a
listening base at bodur and these are
really important things for us during
this period so we're paying the
pakistanis a lot of money to get it
except there was one of these up U2
planes gets shot down over the Soviet
Union they finally get so they can
because they fly at really high uh
altitudes they shoot it down and kov is
furious he hauls in the Pakistani
ambassador in Moscow and he goes where
is this place pesar we've circled it on
the map and like I.E we're GNA blow it
off the map if you all don't wise up and
the Pakistan like whoa whoa whoa whoa
whoa and so um between the these sort of
threats in 1960 about the U2 and then
the United States freezing arms in the
1965 War which the pakistanis believe it
they lost it over that oh yeah and by
the way in that 1965 War the United
States had um when we provided arms to
everybody we said oh we will guarantee
that they no one uses it that pakistanis
and Indians don't use it against each
other and of course we could do nothing
about that and the 1965 War the
pakistanis are using US tanks to go
after Indians in the largest tank war
since battle since World War II so there
are a lot of upset people in South Asia
but here is um I Khan leader of Pakistan
telling the United States that the
United States forgets that our security
hazards and political liabilities have
increased to a dangerous level due to
this u u uh U2 stuff and we kept our
part of the contract whilst the
Americans betrayed us at every turn they
built up India against us they failed to
help us in the 65 war and finally
stopped military aid uh they think that
we exist for their convenience and that
our freedom is uh negotiable dream on so
when the uh lease came up for the
listing post at Babar in 1968 the
pakistanis canceled it they're sick of
it uh meanwhile the Indians weren't too
thrilled about the u United States
either this is earlier when uh Franklin
delanor Roosevelt was President here's
Mahatma Gandhi telling aam Allied
support for freedom and democracy seems
Hollow so long as America has the Negro
problem in her own home Indians were
appalled by segregation they knew
exactly which end of the bus they'd be
sitting on uh so there are issues both
ways and in fact nou and his daughter
Indira Gandhi found the United States
really impossible to work with and they
looked at capitalism as the way
stationed imperialism and fascism
whereas Americans looked as at socialism
as the way station to Communism so
there's no Meeting of Minds on all of
this and so if you look at the
alignments of primary adversaries India
and Pakistan from uh most of the time
are primary adversaries uh P was India
is always Pakistan's primary enemy but
you could argue that with the 62 war is
it Pakistan or is it China it's the
primary adversary of India and then when
you get to the 1971 War which I'll
discuss a little more in a second uh
where Bangladesh is broken off and then
Pakistan is left has left and half the
population then you could argue that for
India China is the primary
adversary and um then if you look at at
that reshuffling if you also look at the
1969 war that reshuffles the um nuclear
Powers so formerly Russia Russia and
China had shared the United States as
their primary enemy but after the 69 War
they're each other's primary enemy and
this gives the United States the swing
position of team up with a or team up
with be and the United States teeing up
with China to overextend Russia and the
Cold War because I had always felt that
the Soviets were the bigger threat in
those days so anyway as you're looking
at alignments you can apply this kind of
framework to any country on the planet
to try to figure out what's going on and
think about how alliances work if I look
at the World War II Allies probably one
of the most effective alliances in world
history if you think about what people
ultimately want then uh the British want
an empire in which the Sun never sets
the United States wants to decolonize
everybody and Joe Stalin wants a
communist Wonderland those are mutually
exclusive but to get there you have to
go through the common waste Station of
getting rid of Hitler so uh the common
existential threat can be a superglue of
the most unlikely Partners but let's
look at the AIS what what they want at
the end of the war are series of
influence in different parts of the
world so for Italy it's um Empire in the
Mediterranean Japan and the Pacific and
then Hitler it's all over Eurasia that's
not mutually exclusive but if you look
who they the primary enemy who stands in
the way of those plans it's Britain for
Italy it's Russia for the Germans and uh
for the Japanese it's First China and
then the United States none of it aligns
so they fight parallel Wars and allow
the Allies to take them out in um detail
so when you're thinking about alliances
in the world today when you're wondering
what's going on with or whatever figure
out who's their real primary enemy get
it straight does that primary enemy um
is that an existential threat for them
so if You' got countries that line up on
same primary enemy existential threat
for all around the most unlikely people
will cooperate on the other hand people
who are very likely to cooperate maybe
like the fascist they all shared this
basic ideology but if they don't have
the same primary enemy and the same uh
theater of Interest geographically the
same in uh theater they may not
cooperate very well at all so you can
apply this to anything you want to apply
to so back to my game here if you're
looking at the cards people have to play
the United States has lousy cards
because we don't share primary enemies
with anybody so it's a stalemate you you
help India the pakistanis hate you you
help Pakistani the Indians hate you it's
no win but if you look at India India
and Russia share a China problem that's
good they can cooperate on that and then
you have Pakistan and China they share
an India problem they can make things
happen over that so they are po cards
for them to play and zero for the United
States to play it's just the way it is
so um the game uh the name of the game
and strategy is to get the outcome that
you want to have happen and it's like
how do you play this game of five person
five country Cutthroat Billiards to get
remotely what you want out of it so for
the English Majors among you I have a
metaphor for the rest of you you can
just bear with
us imagine a game in which every ball
can be a q ball and players can take
turns come leave do whatever at will
sometimes they'll cooperate some of the
time but they don't necessarily want to
pocket the put the same ball in the same
pocket and uh so if that's the case
there's going to be no enduring
cooperation and understand that you want
to have your goal is going to be the
ultimate shot you want to take but as
you're taking the intervening shots
people are going to try to disrupt it
how on Earth do you get through this
Gabe so this is what the next section is
is all about so if you look at this map
and where Pakistan's located it's this
very strategic location in the center of
not quite Center but of Eurasia the
center of the the soviet's boundary
there and I'm going to give you a map
this is from hord mender he's one of the
most famous people to publish on
geopolitics this is his 1904 map it's
actually quite famous and he talked
about how Russia occupies the Heartland
in his day was all these Railway systems
he thought that was the Prime piece of
real estate in the world and then it's
surrounded by this inner marginal
Crescent you look where Pakistan's
located it's right in the center there
right up by Russia and it's a really
crucial location for before sat
satellite imagy is available to put
listening boat posts on Russia Russia is
Hu huge you got to have a bunch of
listening posts to track their missiles
and things and then if you want access
to Afghanistan which when the Russians
go there we want access and of course
when we go there we really want access
so it's a strategic location for the
pakistanis United States was so
frustrating to deal with because we'd be
on and off interested in them because we
don't align on a primary enemy so pre-s
satellite imagery we really wanted to uh
cozy up the pakistanis so we have you
two bases but but then there uh
different thing technology changes and
before we get facilities in Iran uh we
want this listening Post in B bear uh
but technology will eventually change
and then for a while we truly want the
pakistanis to get the mail through to
China when we're trying to break China
out of diplomatic isolation and then
cooperate against the Soviet Union and
Pakistan delivers the mail but then we
we set up an alternate setup in Paris to
go through our embassies that way in
Pakistan it's again irrelevant and then
when Russia's in uh Afghanistan Pakistan
is essential to get Aid to insurgents to
cause the Russians trouble and then of
course when we're in Afghanistan we
really want to uh cooperate with the
pakistanis and that works until we cap
Osama Bin Laden without telling
pakistanis in in their territory babad
and then relations are really not so
great and so it's a very bumpy ride and
in these periods when we really need the
pakistanis we don't pay attention to
Human Rights or the really big on
nuclear proliferation and so the
proliferation is uh is pretty steady so
if you look at uh after the United
States having trouble uh NE negotiating
all this so that whatever you do in the
short term doesn't wreck you in the long
term but in order to get to the long
term of course you've got to go through
the short term so after the U2 crash uh
in Russia where gets shot down and the
pakistanis are having a heart attack
about that that's when the Pakistani
need look to cultivating more better
relations with China because the US
relationship is just too too potentially
costly and the Americans cut off the
military aid and then um when um the
pakistanis are being very nice about
delivering the mail uh for uh Richard
Nixon and Henry Kissinger to line up
invitations in Beijing the United States
is ignoring a a humanitarian nightmare
cuz all of this that coincide
with the
1971 Bangladeshi war for independence so
let me explain what that is to you so
Pakistan was holding presidential
elections the dominant ethnic group in
Pakistan are punjabis sometimes the
cindies like the BH family I think
they're Cindy but anyway generally
speaking the particularly the Army the
punjabis Dominate uh bengalis live in
Bangladesh they won the election and the
punjabis are Furious so they send the
Army to start ing people in East
Pakistan to overturn the the election so
there are refugees pouring into India so
this is the backdrop of of what is going
on there and for anyone who wasn't in
the know the United States is saying
nothing about this the United States
there's this massive human humanitarian
crisis the United States got nothing to
say the United States has something to
say about everything but it had to do
with this is the moment that Nixon is
trying to get himself invited to Beijing
so that he can talk to ma about
cooperating with the Chinese to over
extend the Soviets in the Cold War which
is ultimately what we do and it's very
important to win the Cold War and this
is integral to this but everyone else is
looking going what on Earth is going on
so you have uh Nixon's doing the
mediation in the background we got
refugees flying all over the place uh
India comes to the United States and
says look you need to tell the Chinese
not to intervene in this thing and the
Indians also say you need to bring this
up at the UN human the human rights
stuff because India is literally getting
millions of refugees trying to flee this
this mess and the United States won't do
any of it it gets even better the United
States has the gall to blame the Indians
for the war dream on uh so indiran is
just uh furious at this one and so the
United States had wished that India
would cease being non-aligned and
aligned with the West oh well they CE
being non- aligned all right they sign a
military pact with Russia over this and
then they upgrade their relationship
with Vietnam which totally upsets uh the
United States and it gets even better
they um they shut down Indian they won't
give Scholars any visas to come to India
to study India so you wonder why us
universities didn't have any Indian
studies programs it's all about uh this
so that explains what's going on with
all of that total mess
meanwhile uh but but for Pakistan as all
this is going on um the shav ran Falls
in uh I think it's like February 1979
and then the Russians invade in raate uh
Afghanistan in December 1979 and S
suddenly Pakistan is totally essential
once again and the pakistanis are really
getting sick of being kicked around so
outgoing President Jimmy Carter offers
them I don't know $400 million or
something uh this is z here going
peanuts to the peut farmer and uh the
incoming Reagan administration then UPS
it to 3.2 billion and that money gets
funneled through the I the inter uh
service intelligence directorate it's
like the I don't know the CIA Plus+ Plus
in Pakistan and when you put that kind
of money into that kind of bureaucracy
you're going to make them incredibly
powerful and then they're the ones who
decide how they're going to allocate
money to insurgents in Afghanistan and
and got it there weren't any great
choices but they're um arming some
really anti-western folks in there uh
probably some guy named Osama last name
Bin Laden but anyway I'm not sure the
details on that one but it is going to
have 911 follow on effects and also the
Pakistani the isi is also taking some of
that money and putting it into cashmir
which is going to have real problems for
India uh later on so there are uh real
ramifications for all of this of needing
Pakistan but actually what is happening
anyway and then throughout there is uh
the pakistanis are getting closer and
closer to building the bomb so when the
Russians go piling into Afghanistan
here's spig binski uh Carter's National
Security visor telling him uh our
security policy cannot be dictated by
our non-proliferation policy really I
thought that was our our security policy
and the problem with PR proliferation is
it tends to be a one-way Street whereas
Afghanistan has been anything but and
then here Duna ping was in town and he
told cardi we applaud your decision to
basically toss all these proliferation
human rights considerations for Pakistan
and just arming them no kidding because
the Chinese are providing the nuclear
spare parts so uh the United States
isn't the only country to have trouble
navigating this uh Cutthroat Billiards
the pakistanis have their share of
boomerangs just look how the wars work
so Wars uh create incredible costs so
the 1965 War the pakistanis get exactly
nothing and uh the United States
Pakistan had been the largest Aid
recipient of the I'm not sure if I got
that right but anyway they're a huge Aid
recipient from the United States well
after this war we're not so interested
so that's a lot of money down the tubes
and then in the 1971 War great guys you
lose Bangladesh which by the way has
over half your population so that
Pakistan is no longer the most populous
Muslim country Indonesia is and uh if
you look at the the Cargill war in 1999
this is when Pakistan tries to again go
below the line of control in Kashmir to
try to take some more of Kashmir back uh
C uh Pakistan has to cross right back
and then it gets sanctioned for all of
this so none of these War have actually
worked out very well for Pakistan and
then if you think about it indiaan and
Pakistan are natural trade Partners so
if you take all these wars and just add
up all the costs and then think of the
opportunity costs if Pakistan had been
able to take this money and spend it on
road systems on education and then all
the Lost trade it gives you a sense of
the real cost of all of
this okay well those are Pakistan's
problems India has its own problems uh
here you've got indir Gandhi and Richard
Nixon they really didn't like each other
I mean look at her she looks as if she's
just been fed bad fish and he looks like
he served it up and they just they
cannot abide by each other so in the
1940s when Kashmir is
erupting uh andir Gandhi thinks well no
it's nebor her dad thinks that the
United States should be supporting India
because it's secular and it's
democracy and the United States is a
Paul during the Korean War when India
remains non-aligned instead of
supporting the United States because
it's secular and Dem democratic
and uh the pakistanis are totally
outraged because they're looking at this
go okay these Indians are non-aligned
we're aligned we're taking these risks
for uh at pesar and stuff with the u2s
and uh you're helping these people who
are about to Ally with the Soviet Union
who are you kidding so it's a a total
mess so the Indians have their own
self-inflicted blows uh neou and his
very controversial but his devoted
advisor Krishna Menan and his daughter
and dar Gandhi we're really good at
making these totally insulting remarks
to American VIPs okay it hits the target
without a doubt but the ego that has
just been hit is huge and like an
elephant is not about to forget and uh
meanwhile Pakistan in contrast is just
being this welcoming host so the United
States is going India and Pakistani is
better and it makes really bad trend
lines for India because in the 1962 War
the United States supported India in the
1965 War it's neutral in the 1971 War it
supports Pakistan that's not great and
then India's own very heavy-handed
treatment uh of solutions to the
Insurgency of Kashmir doesn't make that
thing go away it just gets worse so they
have their own problems China also has
its problems with the interaction it's
complicated so on the one hand on the
Sino Indian War absolutely China gets
the territory uh but at what cost you've
got this permanent enemy forever and as
opposed to to uh teaming up with them if
they teamed up they actually would have
had incredible leverage for what the
global order is going to look like but
that's just not to be and moreover if
you look at the 1971 war after the
United States won't help with China uh
India's going okay I think we need
nuclear weapons because then we'll be
able to protect ourselves against China
and after that war when Pakistan's lost
over half its population it has to deal
with Indian population and territorial
just overwhelming superi
the pakistanis go I think we need
nuclear weapons in order to solve this
problem so it's be proliferation all
over the place but as a result of the
1971 War where the um the uh Pakistan
tries to overturn the elections here you
have a uh Indian defense analyst Sur
ranium saying the Pakistani decision to
overturn its elections by deploying the
Army to East Pakistan gave India an
opportunity the like of which will never
come again and what they did is they
armed in insurgents in East Pakistan
then sent the conventional Army in and
that was it for Pakistan in uh East
Pakistan over the interaction for Russia
Works a little better where for Russia
and India it's really quite a good
relationship what Russia offers to India
not only military and economic aid but
also very useful vetos on the UN
Security Council India does not want
pites in Kashmir that it might lose so
it gets uh the Soviet Union to veto
those things so there are no cites and
then as India is trouncing Pakistan in
the 197 War 71 War and the United States
wants them to Halt uh India no way India
wants to finish the job so he gets the
Soviet Union to veto that one and India
does indeed finish the job and meanwhile
for Russia India is really useful it's a
good counterbalance for China so theirs
is rather a beautiful relationship they
have very cordial
relations okay so I think I've now
covered the playing field field right
and uh I've covered the players and
teams and uh their problems with
interacting that's very difficult now
for some of the plays and the
instruments of National Power and here's
the menu of choices you can start with
the light items diplomacy public support
and denial of public support you can
move into more expensive things down the
menu okay for uh one of the things you
can do is help negotiate a really useful
treaty which the United States did it
brokered this Indus water Treaty of 1960
it's the only time I think that I know
of maybe you all know of something where
India and Pakistan have signed an
agreement to the massive benefit of both
of them what does this agreement do you
can see it's a really dense river system
both India and Pakistan need to irrigate
to do that efficiently you need dams and
both of them were poor and didn't have
the dams they're going to cost a billion
dollars the United States was willing to
kick in half that money if they would
both sign the treaty and no terrorist
event or anything derailed it so they
signed it and this treaty has been B
it's been operating some of these dams
ever since to enormous benefit of both
countries does the United States get any
enduring gratitude from either one or
for doing this no zip okay next one is
the United States uh tried to exercise
diplomacy and to to uh convince the
pakistanis and Indians to settle their
differences and it was a total flop and
because if you're going to try to
befriend both India and Pakistan you you
wind up becoming the enemy of one or the
other and the United States diplomacy
was based on certain false assumptions
which are one that India and Pakistan
could be cajoled into settling their
differences and their idea is anyone
who's so stupid is to think that is
crazy and if you're going well what are
the origins of these differences uh
partition was brutal so the British
colonized the Indian sub subcontinent
and then they left in 1947 and they left
really rapidly so that there was no time
to uh to set up any institutional
framework and also you're talking
millions of people and um so Pakistan's
going to be one thing and then uh
India's going to be the other and so
Hindus are just fleeing and uh siks are
fleeing out of Pakistan and Muslims are
fleeing out of uh India going back and
forth and millions are killed while this
is going on so this is the origin at
least the modern origin of why
pakistanis and Indians are so bitter in
addition the United States thought well
surely the China threat is going to make
the Indians come around and realize this
not align stuff's
nonsense uh not not quite yeah when
India not uh what is it aligns it it
aligns with Russia not the United States
so that doesn't remotely work out the
way the United States wanted and then
the United States thought well hey we in
the west were Rich we give Indians and
pakistanis all this Aid um this will
force them to be nice to us and be less
nice to the Communists wrong indiaan and
Pakistan are really astute and they get
lots of aid from everybody so when the
Great powers do align Russia China us or
at least two of those align then you can
actually get stuff done so that's when
you get the Tash Kent agreement for the
1965 War the United States and Russia
both want India and Pakistan to cease
and assist and stop pulling each other
off the map and also in the Cargill
conflict uh when Pakistan is yet again
trying to resolve Kashmir by invading
and then gets itself into trouble and
this guy Noah Sharif who was the head of
Pakistan he all of a sudden gets on a
plane with his family look like it looks
like he's coming into Exile and he he's
trying to fly into the United States the
United States go whoa whoa whoa whoa
whoaa what do you think you're doing
and says you're not coming in here until
you admit that you crossed the line of
control and then you need to get right
back and so he agrees to sign the
Washington agreement to to go right back
but it's absolutely humiliating to for
the pakistanis go oh yeah we went South
of the line of control and then uh well
that didn't work out so now we have to
go right back that he had gone to China
already and pleaded his case to the
Chinese and they told him to get right
back because there was a lot of nuclear
saber rattling going on and the Chinese
were not interested in nuclear war over
this so Pakistan had the choice of okay
fight in fight India by your lonesome or
cross back so they crossed back um and
there were other cases uh in the inner
Cold War period uh when the Great Powers
cooperated and and tamped things down
like terrorist incidents in New Deli and
in Mumbai that didn't go anywhere
because the great Paris told the Indians
and pakistanis to just dial it back all
right another thing you can do is to
publicly support someone and this is
what goes on with Goa which is a
Portuguese Colony the Indians wanted it
back the Portuguese said no way you
cannot have it back and the Indians took
it back and the United States supported
Portugal why it's a NATO Ally and we
have very important bases in Portugal so
we kept the bases but we made the
Indians really angry and there are other
areas of public support or are not
criticizing people publicly um for
instance in the 1971 Bangladesh War when
the United States refuses to support
India by telling China don't enter this
place uh but of course it was December
so the road system would have been a
little rough to even try that but it
made the Indians mad or if you think
during the Cold War so with nou it's the
1956 Hungarian crisis where the Russians
sent tanks into Hungary the Indians
don't say anything about that there's a
Berlin crisis in 1961 where the Russians
are pretty rough and Indians don't say
anything about that and then andera
Gandhi comes in and when the Russians
send tanks into Czech Sakia in 1968 the
Indians say nothing and then when the
Russians invade Afghanistan in 79 again
the Indians say nothing so this is one
way that you make your allies feel
better about things another thing is uh
if you're one of the five veto holders
of the at the UN Security Council you
can do your public support that way and
I've already mentioned these Russian
vetos on Kashmir pites that the Indians
truly didn't want have happened or a
short circuiting the Indian offensive in
Bangladesh so uh this is what Russia did
for India and it was a very valuable
thing for them uh you can also put money
where your mouth is economic aid and
it's interesting the United States
provided far more economic aid than uh
either the Russians or the Chinese but
still uh both pakistanis and Indians
prefer China and uh Russia respectively
and some of this a was really important
during the bear famine in 1967 the
United States sent 20% of its wheat crop
to India it was worth $1.5 billion
that's not something to be sneezed at uh
for I don't know was it 90 million
people it's a lot of people who might
have starved to death and that didn't
work out well at all because Johnson at
that point President Johnson at that
point was so mad at the Indians because
they from his point of view they were
cuddling up to the North Vietnamese and
the Vietnam War wasn't going well for
Johnson so he was fear so he prided the
aid but he did it always at the last uh
minute ship to mouth and Indira Gandhi
was Furious she said I don't ever want
us ever to have to beg for food again uh
and she never did uh so the United
States got no gratitude for or enduring
anything oh and a whole other piece of
it is India's is not subject to famines
anymore and part of it's from the Green
Revolution and who does that it's the
Ford and Rockefeller F Foundation to
figure out the the different strains of
of grains that you want to grow and does
the United States get any credit for
that no zip and here is Krishna Menan
who is neu's controversial adviser
saying look we want to encourage a
little competition between the donors
and they did and India just even Indira
Gandhi who hates Nixon she's racking up
the aid here Secretary of State John
Foster Dallas saying look concerning
India and Pakistan it's difficult to
help one
without making the end of the other and
of course the United States tried to
help both and angered both of them
amazing so another instrument of
national PO is military aid it is even
more difficult to calibrate than the
economic aid so you can see um with the
Pao Mania event where um uh Eisenhower
is building these bilateral relations
and uh treaty organizations to contain
the Russians formerly there had been no
Cold War in South Asia but once eisenh
how are Ali allies with Pakistan all of
a sudden the Russians are in there too
so that's a bit of a boomerang um
another one so when the United States
provides military aid to Pakistan that
just drives India to seeking an alliance
with Russia which isn't exactly what the
United States wanted and then when the
United States helps India right after
the 1962 war with China that alienates
the pakistanis and then they try to
buddy buddy with China not remotely with
the United States wanted to happen and
then when the United States provides Aid
to the isi the inner Services
intelligence directorate which is the
pakistanis and are funding things to uh
get the Russians out of Afghanistan
they're also diverting it into um
cashmir so in 1989 this Insurgency heats
up and it's remained heated ever since
and then um you wind up with China
providing uh nuclear help to the
Pakistani so it's difficult with these
things you get a short-term thing but
then the long-term thing that winds up
may not be what you want at all the
other instrument of National Power if
you got one it's carrier battle group
you can send one of those around which
is what the United States did here's
Enterprise it was the United States's
first uh nuclear propelled aircraft
carrier and so during the 71 War the
United States send this into the Bay of
Bengal the Russians sent some Naval
assets had no effect uh on that war
Pakistan lost right uh the Indians were
Furious they just regard of this is an
absolute threat and how dare we do this
anyway and uh maybe it would have been
better to have left Enterprise in their
home Home Port rather than doing this
and then of course there's sanctions and
embargos the United States does this all
the time and if you look at the list of
the times we're embargoing stuff so uh
at partition we're embargoing everybody
and then during the 65 War we're
embargoing everybody and then uh as
various people are making nuclear
progress and different things there
embargos that come and and go and
Pakistan's really mad because India does
a test uh n an atomic test in 1974 and
Pakistan doesn't do anything until much
later and it's looking why are you
sanctioning us on this nuclear stuff the
Indians have actually done this we
haven't and so if you look at this chart
you can see where the ups and downs of
these sanctions go and clearly they
didn't stop proliferation because in
1998 you have these tit for T nuclear
Atomic tests by both and the United
States tries sanctioning but then it's
just too late they've already tested the
stuff and so the United States basically
gives up and then after 911 of course we
desperately need Pakistan again to deal
with Afghanistan so it's a complicated
world out there all right so another um
instrument of National Power is you can
trade off your territory if you really
want to most people don't but um the
pakistanis clearly did that in 1963 and
we can all speculate on what they got I
mean my hunch would be something to do
with nuclear things but hey um it's not
as if this information is out there in
the public it isn't oh another thing you
can do is go go fundme Insurgency so you
can um and this is done by the United
States Russia China India Pakistan think
of you got a country uh that you don't
like that has some minority people that
want to seced and so they're fighting
there well you can go fund that
Insurgency and then the one you don't
like is pinned because they're going to
be paying attention to that Insurgency
and while they're pinned there they
can't probably do things elsewhere that
you might care about so this is the
logic of what's going on so the United
States belatedly decided ah let's help
the Tibetans and so the CIA is helping
them between 57 and 61 but look at the
dates we did the road system the road
system in tibet's completed by 195 7
it's too late so all you do is get these
people killed because the Chinese have
got the road system all set up in there
so that doesn't exactly work but what
for after the 62 War all the way until
1979 when dunell ping calls it off the
Chinese are funding insurgencies of
let's see the misos the manipuri and the
Naga people all don't like different
aspects of Indian Rule and the Chinese
are more than half to stir that pot and
the the really big pot to stir are the
naxalites it's huge and while as long as
the pakistanis who've got East Pakistan
they can uh stir some of that up and oh
by the way these naxalites are still
there in India they they have not gone
away it's it's a serious part of India
where they are and then of course
Pakistan's location right next to
Kashmir means they can stir that forever
and the tragedy of these what they they
become Frozen conflicts is the
outside uh Power if they are playing
their cards right their aoral cards
right uh they're not bearing any of the
costs they're pinning someone they don't
particularly like all the costs are born
by the local population who are
suffering horrendous deaths lack of e uh
economic growth having Warfare where you
live what a total disaster so that's how
it works um another two complaint this
game so the Indians according to the
pakistanis have funded the balak balak
people they straddle uh Iran and
Pakistan don't particularly like being
told what to do so apparently uh India
is supposed to have put its finger on
that scale the other thing the
pakistanis accuse Indians of doing is uh
encouraging a past tune Insurgency up
north and that would be a way of
diverting Pakistani attentions from
Kashmir if they're totally busy with P
Tunes they can do less in Kashmir but
what you're the result of these things
is people are becoming more and more
bitter uh the hatreds just Spike the
economic growth isn't happening poverty
everywhere and it makes these problems
more intractable not less so when I
think about these what I Frozen
conflicts there a number of ones that
you know about besides Kashmir there's
Korea there's Palestine so if you look
at Kashmir if I've got it right uh so
you fund that thing and then what great
from China's point of view if uh
Pakistan is doing that um India is
Frozen that it can't do other things
because it's constantly paying attention
to what's going on in Kashmir as opposed
to go China I don't know about this and
or in the Korean War back in the day uh
if things are all stiring stirred up in
Korea uh China has to really pay
attention to that and it delays the rise
of China and and those days that
benefited Russia but these things can
change over time as to who the
beneficiary is and then you can play
this game and think about how it works
in Palestine and I'm no um expert in
that part of the world but I think this
Frozen conflict veto player uh works
that they're these veto players who are
vetoing peace very easily all you have
to do is send a certain number of
package bombs and peace is not going to
happen
so uh Cutthroat Billiards uh what do you
what can you take away from all this
well common enemies cannot be conjured
you so check out the alignments of who
these common enemies are before you
leave the parking lot um and figure it
out for all possible players who might
want to crash the party like who what's
their primary objective who's their
primary adversary what primary theater
are they truly interested in and then uh
you got your hunches on how you think
this is and then you should reassess
early and often to see if your
assumptions are correct and don't worry
about changing your mind uh some people
get really hung up about being wrong
don't worry
uh reassessing is a sign of strength
it's like I got more information I've
changed my mind good thing don't double
down on bad information and then if
you're looking into areas of the world
that are ethnically diverse where people
have been at odds for a long time uh
expect veto players and real difficulty
in settling that matter out and part of
good strategy is recognizing certain
some problems it's not feasible to solve
and then we all have scarce resources
you can't do everything focus on those
things where you think you can solve and
uh but if the great Powers align things
can happen and the story is even better
than that that sure there are a few big
Powers but the small and medium Powers
if you add them all up they are
far
uh the aggregate their aggregate wealth
exceeds anyone great power so if the
smaller Powers agree on what they're up
to then the the the big Powers have to
pay attention and that's a positive
thing before we move on to the interview
I just want to say a quick thank you to
today's sponsor scale AI the AI race is
the Manhattan Project for the Modern Age
whoever wins reshapes the balance of
global power that's why scale partners
with the US government to America's AI
advantage through their data Foundry the
Air Force Army defense Innovation unit
and chief digital and artificial
intelligence office all trust scale to
equip their teams with AI ready data and
the technology to build powerful
applications scale recently introduced
defense llama scale's latest solution
available for military personnel with
defense llama military personnel can
harness the power of AI to plan military
or intelligence operations and
understand adversary vulnerability
whether through us work with the
government or with businesses like open
AI Google Deep Mind or meta scale is at
the Forefront of us AI Innovation if
you're interested in learning more about
how scale Powers Frontier a capabilities
go to scale.com
thar all right back to Sarah so it seems
like the lesson from this lecture the
big lesson is we couldn't be allies with
both Pakistan and India at the same time
we had to choose one so which one should
we have chosen oh well the p our primary
enemy was pretty much the Soviet Union
for the duration of the Cold War I mean
China was a problem but the Soviets were
the big problem and so India and
Pakistan never fit that bill and so it's
had it had to do with whatever the
problem of the day was and Pakistan had
a very uh critical location and so we
needed it for a whole bunch of things
and you can see how that works so while
you need them you pay a lot of money to
them and uh presumably the money's worth
it for them for the hassles of dealing
with the difficult tenant uh so that's
how uh it it it worked but um nowadays
the relationship with India is changing
in fact it has changed because their big
buddy Russia is well after the end of
the Cold War instead of being the big
friend it was the big nuisance not so
much for India but for everybody else
and uh now for India it's primary
adversary is China without a doubt and
the United States States I think is
looking that China poses the primary
threat and to the extent that both of
them see it that way that will make them
a line and Pakistan less so um it sounds
like at the time it was right to choose
Pakistan as the main Ally for the United
States well we tried to choose India uh
too but uh yeah we tried to do them
simultaneously but India's further south
right and so for a long time before we
got satellite imagery you want to have
listening posts and things up in
Pakistan so India just simply doesn't
have the location for that so that was
the original reason for interest in
Pakistan I want to better understand why
the Soviet Union was such a charismatic
example for countries that were
decolonizing like India uh I think go
back and put yourself as a generation of
what your life experience was if your
life experience was World War I the
total Butchery Butchery of it so you're
telling young men your age go ah you're
in a trench I want you go up and over
the edge into oncoming machine gun fire
we know what's going to happen when that
what happens right and they're literally
in battles like the psalm they're losing
hundreds of thousands of people I don't
mean casualties I mean I mean dead dead
and so uh and then you have the Great
Depression
afterwards and then add to it India's
been colonized by a bunch of really
opinionated white people right and
transferring a lot of wealth out of
India to England
and so uh you look at Marxism and boy it
sounds plausible right it sounds like
these evil capitalists they're just
wasting lives and surely this is the
explanation now the technicalities of
Marx's labor theory of value don't
actually turn to be turn out to be
accurate it's not just labor that
produces value like Silicon Valley you
understand it's what comes up here
produces a tremendous amount of value
and the uh Marxist Theory doesn't
recognize that and so there are massive
flaws in theory and then when you put
communism into practice if you want to
have equality which is what they wanted
if you're going have equality you're not
going to have any Liberty right because
in order to make it equal you just
expropriate and then you divy it out to
every to everybody and there's no
liberty in that right and uh all another
piece about
democracies and even flawed ones even if
they have a semi Free Press you a lot of
the icky news bubbles up but in
dictatorships it doesn't right so you
compare the seis sides of uh
some uh democracies that aren't doing
that well and then to the the the public
the pr thing that the that the
dictatorships are presenting so you can
picture n of his generation he's sick of
British right and so Fabian socialism
he's not for killing lots of people to
impose socialism he has a uh he has a
much lighter touch than Stalin one thing
I was thinking about while you were
mentioning the gandan N had a big
problem with American segregation yeah
is uh at the same time in the 50s uh by
that point over 10% of the Soviet
population had at some point been in the
gulags or are currently in the gulags
and segregation is very bad gulags are
even worse and it's the same proportion
of the population that's been the gags
maybe people just didn't know about the
gulags back then um I don't think
Communists let you know those things
right it this is one um for a lot of
Russians because we were uh my husband
and I were in the Soviet Union in the
1988 89 Academic Year and that's early
gorbachov before everything totally
falls apart and there's no food so there
was there wasn't much food but there was
some food and uh it was just as the
Russians were suddenly being able to
read in a fairly Free Press about the
things that had happened and were
appalled about what had gone on under
Stalin and they just hadn't realized all
of it one of the reasons that socialism
was appealing to these decolonizing
countries was because in the preceding
decades from the 20s to 40s the Soviet
Union actually had pretty good growth uh
growth rates in those 20 years their GDP
went from 8% to 18% of world production
was that just catch-up growth what was
going on that time oh Russia well uh
there was tremendous rebuilding after
World War I there's another piece is it
was so weird when we were in Russia in
8889 um anything that was sold at the
markets that came from somewhere else
they would market import NAA means
imported so the idea and I remember
think this is really weird because
normally you you would say it's I don't
know Hungarian this and that or whatever
I oh this means that anything from
somewhere else is better than what we
got that it's a really bad sign and they
had like a what I would call a doughnut
Empire normally when you think of an
Empire mother Central is the most
developed part and then there's the
periphery where all the natural
resources are taken away that it was an
inverted Empire Russia is the donut the
rich places were places like
Czechoslovakia and Poland had been much
richer places and so the Russians are uh
like surf owners are uh sucking in all
the wealth from these places and I think
that's another reason why the shattering
of the Soviet Union when they lost all
of their insured Eastern Europe why it
was such a mess for Russia they did not
realize they still don't realize the
degree to which they were living off the
wealth produced in the uh West the
European portions of Russia that since
became
independent who was the last Soviet
leader who like truly believed in
communism gorbachov was a True Believer
he um he did not believe it was possible
to take a u-turn on the road to
Communism so that when he was doing his
reforms it was to um improve communis
ISM make it better so he absolutely
believed in it when um you're you you
started your career in Soviet studies
and you're trying to figure out like
what's going on in the criminal all the
time what is it what is the key to
figuring out criminology what is the key
to figuring out what's happening in the
PO Bureau well what I did for my uh
doctrinal dissertation so I wrote a
history of the sinos so well the Russo
Chinese border when when it was figured
out which between 1858 and 1924 this
when all this territory went and what I
did is so most of this isn't Soviet
right it's 17 to 24 is the Soviet part
but you go to archives in Russia you see
what they'll let you see go to and this
is when you could go to those archives
they're closed now and I went to Beijing
saw the archives you were allowed to see
and then in naning there were some other
ones there and then in Taiwan the ones
they would allow you to see and then
Japan the ones they would allow you to
see and they're all lying about
different things or covering up
different things so it's a jigsaw puzzle
you sort of put it you put it together
that way so uh that was how um I did it
and also for the whole crem crem
kremlinology
um is pay attention to what dictators
say because they've got to communicate
at some level to their own populations
they quite often tell you exactly what
they want to do and you think that's
insane who would do that well hello
hello right uh so read what they have to
say and read what others have to say
then you need to read things in um uh
the Russian language so uh I just I read
a lot of things you just read broadly
read more broadly than whatever your
topic is because it's it's um the
unknown unknowns is what you're after
what are the things that are truly
important I have no idea about and the
only way you get to those is archives or
reading broadly where you bump into
things woo that turns out to be
important when you were giving the
lecture it seemed like these primary
adversaries whoever it is it's like very
permanent and there's some like deep
reason why it has to be this way but if
you look at this SOS Soviet split it's
just like they're both communist they're
both leninist parties and they have this
falling out over there were a couple
things you mentioned but like it's it's
not clear why somebody has to be
somebody else's primary adversary why
you can't turn that around oh well you
can but uh Russia and China uh have
these territorial differences and the
issues I listed there of fighting to the
last Chinese in the Korean War ma didn't
really like that there are a lot of
Chinese who die in the Korean War where
the Russians sort of get in there and
then you're stuck you have to for
Prestige reason stay there and the
really big one I didn't discuss in any
detail so Stalin's really worried about
a um two front War Nazis in the west and
Japanese in the East and so he Brokers
the second united front between the
Chinese nationalist under shanga Sheek
and the Chinese Communists under Mau at
a place called Shion in late
1930 um what is at 36 and so it's called
the Shion incident where shankai Sheek
was reputedly kidnapped and up there but
really what's going on is uh it's
setting up the second united front and
then the Japanese go ballistic and
that's when they invade all the down the
coast and up the uh yanga River and that
means the Chinese are fighting Japanese
for you the Japanese are not going to
launch into Siberia so that works for
Stalin but the Chinese realize this and
it's not appreciated yeah but then they
helped the Communists get into power in
China right like you think they'd be
grateful for that no no he wanted to
divided China he's telling me Oh stop at
the Y stock at the you need a breathing
space there and mouse and keeps on
going if you're the president if you're
the Secretary of State and you're
looking at this where there's these
intering systems of alliances and you
give some guy aid because you need
something and pisses everybody else off
how the hell are you supposed to keep
track of this do do they have these
matrices that you got up there and they
we have so many wonderful people uh
working in the state department I've met
a number of them because they come are
students at the war College you should
be proud of all the people who work for
the Department of State they're all of
these different experts different parts
of the world that get sent around hither
and Yan uh very thoughtful people also
I've read in the archives many CIA
reports because I've gone to these
presidential archives starting with the
Truman Administration all the way up to
Bush senior as you get to the more
recent stuff uh less of it's been
Declassified so the
I've read most of the CIA reports I've
read are for earlier periods where have
been Declassified it's impressive the
level of analysis and I know that the
CIA has several P there's the analytical
part of it and then there's the uh send
uh send people out to do we aren't even
going to talk about what they're which
is completely different um but they're
very fine analysts and then we have like
the Department of Agriculture has very
fine analysts about agriculture of the
whole world so we have a tremendous
amount of expertise and
the other thing that presidents get and
also the high level uh bureaucrats get
are these daily reports where and
they're very short because they have to
be about what's going on everywhere in
the world that people think is important
for them to know so there are a
tremendous number of smart well-educated
people trying to get information to
presidents secretaries of states and
things and then you have all these
Regional desks where there's uh I don't
I can't remember exactly I don't know
the the organiz a chart of the state
department but you can look at it by
region of the world people work there
and and provide this so um there are
wonderful experts that are working on
this uh you mentioned in the lecture
that if China and India had figur out a
way to work together the world order
could have looked completely different
uhuh spell out the counterfactual for us
how would it have been different I spent
the grand to of a week in India was a
trip on the way back from Australia and
that was the amount of time we had but
we went into the Mahatma Gandhi Museum
in New Delhi and there's a whole piece
of it where shankai Sheek is giving him
things and it became really clear that
shankai Sheek had a really good
relationship with India deep respect for
India the shared desire of oh we want to
be independent we don't want Japanese
running around our country we don't want
a bunch of westerners running around we
share this with India and so I think uh
if you get shaiek winning the Chinese
Civil Chinese Civil War and things you
might have had them team up and had much
more productive
relationship that's interesting because
you often you think of like when you
hear nationalists you think they're the
ones going to be interested in
territorial disputes but in fact you
know they wouldn't have cared about
Tibet or something and well next time
you're in New Delhi go check out the
museum but when I was there it was like
20 years ago but I remember being
pressed go wow there's all and then when
Gandhi was assassinated this is Mahatma
not the um indir who's also assassinated
no relations um that uh the Chinese the
Nationalist sense all sorts of
condolences and and different things so
yeah there could have been a different
different
outcome I wonder if the worst thing
about the non- Align movement was that
because they wouldn't fall under anyone
else's nuclear umbrella they wouldn't
lie with a great power that had nukes
they in order to keep up deterr they had
to build nukes themselves and so then
you have this nuclear proliferation and
you know that that was like it's really
important to get people allied with one
great power even if it's not you just to
prevent the nukes from going wide I
think the 1962 war made nou realize that
non-alignment was a nonstarter and
that's for the reasons you're talking
about is like okay um we just got eaten
alive by the Chinese okay we need big
friend and we probably need some uh big
missiles eventually and it's it's not
immediately the Indians don't come
around that we absolutely need nuclear
weapons uh until the Bangladesh War when
China's become more of a threat uh
by
1971 uh like did Nero really think that
the Soviet Union might still win the
Cold War n was dead like 64 so it's his
daughter but when did they become allies
with uh the Soviet Union oh well the
official Alliance I'm just defining what
an Al I I made up what what an alliance
is so I would say it is the security
pact that uh in der Gandhi signs in 1971
right so at that point they really
thought the Soviet Union could have won
the Cold War like why didn't they just
choose the winner in retrospect oh oh
well I remember the Cold War vividly um
we felt we were losing it most of the
way through and why is that well we
always felt well a because the
propaganda right because they're all
living beautifully and then they're
quite good they're very good at
propaganda so um the United States had
massive racial problems think about
1960s uh Martin Luther King are pointing
out hideous problems with this country
civil rights uh demonstrations
everywhere anti- uh Vietnam War
demonstrations everywhere the women's
movement the environmental movement
there are loads of unhappy people
pointing out all of these problems which
is a good thing because then the United
States starts working on fixing some of
these problems of course they're not
fixed but there's Improvement on them
whereas in Russia it's no one can travel
so you can't see how unbelievably poor
they are and so you go to Moscow and you
think well this is a plausible City well
there is only one plausible City in the
place or maybe it's two St Petersburg or
while it's with Leningrad in those days
so uh people didn't realize but yeah we
felt we were losing the Cold War in fact
at the very end of the Cold War because
I was in the bush archives so
gorbachov's in and um Bush Reagan and
then Bush are thinking well he just
looks like another one of these people
and we're not going to take the
propaganda seriously and then they
started go whoa whoa whoa whoa
and then it's in 88 where bush is going
wow maybe it is going to end and then
the United States teams up with helmet
Cole of Germany to do the fastest uh get
the Russians out of Eastern Europe ever
but um gorbachov is the one who wants to
cooperate with West oh one thing you
should know about Warfare you think the
winners win it no actually it's when the
losers decide they've had enough that's
when a war ends uh otherwise it doesn't
end
so uh the Russians got sick of it and
they quit I wonder if there's a lesson
in here for what people called the cold
war with China today where people think
you know it's really competitive China
might have a bigger economy than us soon
and really if you actually got to see
what's happening day to-day in China
maybe you might decide like the Soviet
Union there's a bunch of things broken
with it they're not really competitive
in the long run economically and so
we're going to win uh well I don't know
when lose but uh they have a much a very
low per capita standard of living do the
math you go yeah they've got a big
economy because they're I don't they're
not a third of the world's population
now but it's it's huge and uh divide the
1.3 billion whatever it is you come up
with a low number for per capita
standard of living and I think for human
beings that's the number that matters
right of how what is your family income
look like so uh they got a long way to
go on that one I want to go back to
kissing Jour 1971 so because they want
an somebody to like send the message
along to China to open up they shut up
about Pakistan's genocide in Bangladesh
were numbers very somewhere between
300,000 and 3 million people died awful
hundreds of thousands of people were
raped
um I know they didn't have email back
but there was no other way to get the
message across you have to a bet a
genocide in order to get a message
across well first of all um the cold war
is a misnomer because the Bloodshed in
the third world was horrendous and uh I
will eventually compile the stats on
this not that they're great stats but it
it's obsene numbers I think uh Congo had
a civil war where literally over 10
million people died and that's only just
one of these things so um the United
States cannot deal with all of these and
if you think about it uh the time when
the United States was really quite
idealistic the Iraq War goes in think
it's great democ in this place uh it
it's a massive Civil War and then we're
blamed for it so be careful about where
you intervene because you may not be
able to stop a thing and then you'll get
blamed for what's going on so um
Bangladesh is horrible but it is not um
our P you will get overextended if you
intervene in everything under the planet
also there's a question of why the
United States or anyone should be doing
all of it shouldn't it be through the UN
and other things uh the really key thing
was winning the Cold War so Nixon
absolutely did prioritize getting the
mail through to Mao he did so 1971 Good
Old Henry hack as he's known in the
archives Henry a Kissinger uh he gets
his secret trip in there lines up
Nixon's trip in 72 and then it's going
to overextend Russia in the Cold War why
because with this sinos Soviet split and
all the rest of it Russia has to
militarize its entire border with China
it's already militarized its entire
border with Europe right think about
this and you're talking about mechanized
nuclear Armed Forces with all the tanks
and everything else that goes with them
it is not cheap imagine if the United
States had to do this on our Canadian
and Mexican borders bankrupting right
and we're a lot richer than they are so
uh we team up with China we provide them
all kinds of Naval technology which is
not going to bother us uh they give us
listening posts again we love listening
posts you know right up on the on the
Russian uh border and the Russians are
scared stiff of the Chinese the Chinese
with good military equipment that
wouldn't be a good thing for them uh
when I asked how was president and he
built these bases in Pakistan to have
the You2 planes go to Russia we had
bases in Turkey we had bases in Japan we
had bases in a lot of other places in
Europe um this this like marginal
increase in coverage was it really worth
uh breaking off the alliance with India
or off India oh yeah yeah yeah um sorry
India um I think at the time people felt
we absolutely have to know be able to
cover everything and I don't know the
details of where they had their nuclear
this and that stored and things and all
their testing areas but I'm sure you
needed to have the entire Place covered
and so yeah it was very serious on these
nuclear weapons they can reach the
United States so we had better know
what's going on um so new new books
about the Cold War are coming out all
the time new books about World War II
are coming out all the time yeah uh
people are writing like thousands of
papers about this stuff all the time how
much new stuff are we learning every
year all these Scholars were still
studying these what kinds of new things
do we keep unearthing
well um I'm personally sick of writing
about World War II I've done enough of
it and so I'm personally not going in
that direction yeah it's endless I think
for a lot of the books of these
narrative Feelgood is like I'll tell you
about some regiment and all the heroic
stuff they did and it's nice light light
airplane read and a lot of people like
that stuff I personally like things
where I learn things that are conceptual
that I can then apply to other problems
which those books wouldn't help me but
that's just me how do you decide which
are the good history books and which
aren't you're just on Amazon you can't
like read it yet you're just like
looking at on Amazon well it's hard what
I would say is give it a book the 30
second test and what's that if the
book's another part of the world flip to
the bibliography which you can do on
Amazon and zinc through there for about
30 seconds and see is there anything in
the language of the country in question
in the bibliography like how much and if
there is zip uh I would toss it I mean
how much I'm curious how many of you
would be interested in reading a book
that says it it knows everything about
the United States and there's not a
single English Source cited I think
you'd regard the book as garbage and
that Americans do this routinely and
it's a problem with political science
degrees where it would be very easy to
require anyone who's going to do a
specialty in comparative politics or IR
international relations that hey uh you
need to pass a language test and don't
try Spanish if you think you're going to
talk about the Middle East right if it's
going to be Middle East it it better be
something like Arabic farsy turkic
Hebrew and better yet if you're really
going to be a serious Middle Eastern
expert try all four
right I mean that would be true
expertise where and where you can read
books uh in the language and get uh what
other people are thinking about things
so that would be my basic is find people
who aren't playing half court tennis all
about Team America get to the other side
of the net and try and figure out what
other people thinking doesn't mean you
have to agree with them but it means you
are are making the effort to see where
they're coming from during the Cold War
all the proxy wars was it good that we
were just like uh letting off steam in
these smaller ways and that therefore we
could avoid the bigger Great War it
wasn't letting off Ste it was horrendous
I don't know the answer in fact uh my
current project is a history of the Cold
War and I've read a lot of things and I
will comi I'm going to compile a lot of
tables on things like this of just
putting the data together it'll take a
long time but then when you get the
table it'll be a really quick really
quick
skim so if you got
uh a civil war turning somewhere in
Latin America or somewhere in Africa so
no one's aiding it fine then you if you
have Russia puts its finger on the scale
then of course we're going to put our
finger on the scale so that means the
Russians are providing Industrial Age
weapons we're providing Industrial Age
weapons what happens casualties just go
through the roof and that's what went on
through the Cold War and then there
there this magical inner Cold War period
when all the that stopped and that's
when you get this tremendous growth
across the third world because uh there
aren't these insurgencies just tearing
up wealth and then you could see
recently look at North Africa it's a
mess right now right it's both Isis or
whatever it is in there is doing its
stuff and then you have Vagner group or
whatever they are in there and then you
have the Chinese further south and
everybody's feeling everything you got
Civil War all over the place and then
that means military age males want to
get out because people kill you right or
they'll either draon you into fighting
where you don't want to fight or they'll
just kill you outright so they're all
trying to get into boats to Europe which
is destabilizing it's a mess we're in
the second Cold War and this is part of
it what was the biggest when you're
during this project in War what were
like the biggest miscalculations that
people were making were they were they
too suspicious on the other side but
they're not suspicious enough were were
they like too concerned about basis and
or they missing I need to think more
about that because I think there are
probably all sorts of things and and
also it's impossible to know the right
thing to do and then afterwards when it
pans you go well that was a mess it it's
hard to know but I um think it was
probably a terrible mistake when
Eisenhower thought here's the Supreme
command Allied Commander of World War II
who knows all about hot Wars doesn't
want to do that when the United States
deposes mosc and Iran in 1954 I can see
Eisenhower's view is hey we're just
deposing one guy and we're going to
avoid the Russians taking oil fields
here Etc and he thinks that's a better
tradeoff well the Iranians have never
forgotten that they're Furious to this
day wouldn't you be if you're Iranian uh
mosc was uh democratically
elected or another time uh actually in
Vietnam uh we didn't want to hold we
didn't push the South Vietnamese to hold
elections because we knew hoochi men
would win he was the only National
figure in Vietnam so the United States
is all about free elections the
Vietnamese could have run a free
election and hoi men would have won that
was our assessment that he would win
okay well if you're for free elections
it means you don't get the outcome you
want you and I wonder if um that wasn't
a terrible mistake because the
Vietnamese actually can't stand the
Chinese so there were always going to be
a counterbalance to the Chinese but um
due to the McCarthy era uh we purged all
of our ch China experts all these
children of missionaries who knew a
great deal about China less so about
Vietnam but at least it's a related
cultural group so we had um gotten rid
of all that
expertise uh in the McCarthy era so
we're running blind in
Asia what you just mentioned about the
fact that we we would curtail what kinds
of Elections you can hold in these
countries after we after Germany and
Japan surrendered if they tried to elect
another fascist party we wouldn't have
been like all right well that's what you
guys voted for they're in charge now we
would have you know and so why why is
the principle different in Vietnam
because the the South Vietnamese would
have voted for as well uh we've just
been fighting a massive war with uh
Japan and Germany there's no way we're
going to let the Germans and Japanese
decide anything
initially but the what we did do for
both Germany um our half the West
Germany and Japan is we did our best to
set up Democratic institutions that
within a cycle or two they're making
their decisions whom they electing we
are not choosing their leaders and it
was a very generous piece it was uh
realizing in World War I ostracizing
Germans ostracizing uh Russians it's
probably
doesn't it you need to bring them back
into the family of Nations because
they're on the planet they're not
leaving the planet and the generous
peace with Germany look at them they're
the most wonderful allies as are the
Japanese they're terrific during the
Cold War uh the USSR is constantly
funding these communist parties around
the world um uh and these parties are
doing like exactly their bidding
whatever stallin says they'll do I don't
know about that yeah feel free to
clarify but it doesn't feel like any
other country managed to pull this off
there's not like an American party in
the the French Parliament that does
exactly what the president would tell
them to do how they pull this off I
don't think it's that they did exactly
uh what anyone wanted what the
Communists have is a really powerful
Doctrine for how you go from nothing to
something in a failing State how you
start out with a bunch of people on some
campus ma literally starts out as a
junior librarian in Beijing University
so I don't he's there with the
Librarians I don't know the ladies who
knows what it is it's probably guys in
those days uh and then he's turning
these people into cadres and eventually
gorillas and eventually conventional
Army but they have a really good uh
program that uh works the year the world
over and it's very effective for taking
power within a broken State it's lousy
at producing Prosperity thereafter right
and you look at the Communist party
today they're really good at staying in
power for a while there under dunsha
ping it ran in parallel what the
economic reforms needed to be to to
produce wealth and what the party needed
in order to be more powerful but now
that's running across purposes because
for the party to maintain its Monopoly
well uh all these much more educated
Chinese aren't going to be interested in
that anymore and so it's time to lock
those people up and then you're going to
have trouble with uh keeping your
develop your economic growth rate going
Ma dies and iMed immediately things
improve China experiences as growth
trajectory um uh Stalin dies and you
know cruise is not a teddy bear but at
least you like cut down the ter uh the
gulock system and so it does seem like
if you have an especially bad dictator
you do have this sort of regression the
mean where the next guy's probably not
as bad as the worst guy who's ever been
in charge of the country and I wonder if
that implies that you know if we got rid
of Kim Jong-un or the ayatolla or
something the next guy probably won't be
as bad I don't know but I I think um
iconic leaders like Ma and Stalin they
were canonized by winning their war wars
Stalin by winning World War II uh the
Russians revered him for doing that uh
and they had experienced uh every
Russian experienced World War II it was
Central to their lives to win that thing
so Stalin is canonized for doing that
and now the man who puts Humpty Dumpty
back together again when no one else
could and then fights the great Powers
capitalist powers to EST stal in Korea
he's again been canonized whoever comes
after them is not going to have that
level of prestige it's just going to
devolve that's period and then for the
successors of Stalin they were sick of
being terrified about whether they're
going to be purged he kept putting
bullets in people's heads like Vladimir
Putin that you do this long enough that
people are horrified and and don't want
to have it they don't want to live that
way anymore so there's that piece of it
as well I guess I'm not sure what the
answer is like if today if you found out
tomorrow that Putin is dead is your
estimation that things are going to
improve or get worse um my estimation in
that kind of system is there's going to
be a leadership struggle that's the
problem with dictatorships they're
absolutely brittle and that's what's
wonderful about having elections you
just every four years or whatever it is
you have an election whoever it is is
going to be whatever it is but in these
dictatorships no one knows and so
everyone so Stalin literally I think uh
he uh didn't show up at breakfast no one
wanted to open the door and then
probably they decided hm let's not open
the door let's just let that door stay
shut for a few days and then when it
starts stinking we'll no
perfect so that's how he dies um so
you're going to be guaranteed a freefor
all so if there's a free-for-all for
something like
Ukraine they will probably have to call
that off because they got to focus on
Moscow that's what happened with the
Korean War why is the Korean War and
Stalin dies Russians want it over
because they got all kinds of unrest
it's uh various prisons uh in their own
gulags they're having uh riots they're
having I think some Bulgaria maybe East
Germany as well and they they got
problems so they don't want to deal with
the Korean War anymore it's like who
cares forget about it so um you would be
guaranteed that which might be highly
beneficial for Ukraine but knowing Putin
he's an evil man he'll probably stick
around
forever um while you're starting this
cold war history do you um how close did
be get to a nuclear bomb some people
argue that like you know there were all
these close incidents it like basically
should have happened almost in the sense
of like odds and some people say like it
wasn't M mad worked it wasn't going to
happen why would they risk a first
strike oh it's a miracle we're all here
I think in the Cuban Missile Crisis it
came down to a Soviet subcap they had
like the political commissar the
military commissar I have to reread this
but I don't know whether you needed a
vote of two out of three to launch a
nuclear weapon or or whether one guy was
senior and you have to get him to come
along I have to to read the data but
basically someone put their foot down in
the Soviet sub not to launch a
nuke okay we lucked out of that one and
then I think under Reagan there was an
Able Archer missile test uh or we were
doing a war game or something and the
Russians looked at it and thought it was
the real thing for a while and that just
scared the beas out of them and I think
it was after that that Ronald Reagan
started moderating his retoric he like
oh you don't want to have them on the
edge like this this is not going to be
beneficial so it was uh quite close the
advantage in the cold war is all our
leaders all the way
through Bush senior were all veterans of
World War II in one way or another
they'd serve some of them on the battle
line like Bush senior had and others um
near enough so that they understood how
dangerous it was and like all the Soviet
leaders Bish nef and all those people
had had uh seen all sorts of people be
butchered so they were cautious in a way
I don't think Vladimir Putin is going
back to the lecture if it's true that
you can't get primary adversaries to be
friends with each other and if you want
to be friends with one of them you're
going to make enemies with the other one
I mean the world is full of people who
are enemies with each other does that
mean that at once America can only be
friends with half the world and it's got
to be anyways with the half that this
half hates I don't with indiaan and
Pakistan it was so intense because of
partition of so many people who died and
it was recent right
47 and so you would would expect that
those animosities to die down and also
their new states trying to establish
their legitimacy so that was
particularly difficult I don't know that
most countries in the world are uh
necessarily want to kill all of their
neighbors and then you can uh look at
things
forever uh Britain and France were going
at it and then Germany became the
primary problem between World War I and
World War II so then Britain is teaming
up with France its former primary enemy
and that whole problem goes away and
then you have the generous peace after
World War 2 not one world war one was
not a generous piece and also we have
the mismanaged Great Depression that
allows fascists to rise all over the
place but after World War II of
generosity to the
Germans uh it's over look at Europe it
if you study European history it's
they're all trying to butcher each other
for centuries and then they realize what
a waste let's just trade play by the
rues
should we have cut off lendley Aid to
Stalin after 1943 when it's obvious that
bad idea when it's obvious that they're
winning against the Germans if you had
done that then they would have stopped
advancing as fast in Eastern Europe that
what you're thinking no no more more of
Europe could have been free earlier on
no because you're assuming that uh World
War II was not a closely run thing I
think it's a much more closely run thing
than you think and uh there's no uh no
one's sure of how it's going to turn out
everyone knows if it goes longer it's
more of my kids who are dying so there's
no way you are going to cut Aid to the
Army that's fighting World War II let's
all right here's a concept for you
there's a main theater in the war how do
I know what the main theater is that's
where most of the people fighting are
that's the main front Main theater uh uh
Russians fought between 2/3 and 3/4 of
the Nazi army always that makes the
Eastern Front the main theater so you
all think Pearl that you all think that
the Normandy invasion was a big deal no
that is a peripheral operation it is
peripheral to the main theater and if
the Russians hadn't been doing bution
this big operation that coincides with
Normandy no way would we ever have
gotten on to the continent and that's in
19 1944 so cutting Len Le Aid insane uh
but you you're eliminating the problem
of fascism until uh people have
forgotten what fascism meant uh but
you're left with the problem of
Communism um by that same logic look the
main theater in the Pacific War was in
China where most of the fighting was
happening our LLY state to Chen kek was
1 to 2% of what we were sending to
Stalin in today's dollars we send Stalin
$1 trillion worth of Aid um uh just
tremendous amounts of supplies he used
to then instill a communist
totalitarianism on Eastern Europe if we
had sent a fraction of that Aid to Chen
Kai Sheek and help us with the Japanese
maybe we would still be in power we
wouldn't have to fight as much we
couldn't get it in it's because if you
want to deliver Lenley a this is the
problem in World War I it's why did
Russia fall in World War I why would you
ever let that happen there's no way to
get the aid in because Russia hadn't
built its mermans Railway which goes way
up North and it hasn't completed this uh
Trans Siberian Railway doesn't do those
things until when merman is early in two
1917 and the trans Siberians 1916 that's
like right before the Zar Falls and so
um couldn't Aid Russia in World War I it
falls for lack of arms and then um the
blockade that the Japanese did was
really effective so to get Aid in you
need Railways and you need ports uh the
companies had covered all that and they
owned all the railway systems so the
only way we could get stuff in is we're
flying over the hump the Himalayas okay
so you're going to fly in aviation fuel
plus the airplanes and then you're going
to try to bomb Japan from China imagine
flying in aviation fuel it's like a
nonstarter and I think the best argument
you can make is on that is that rather
than getting sh I Sheek to do the Burma
campaign uh
4344 and he was dead against it is let
him keep all that equipment whatever you
got over the hump instead of sending it
over to Burma which is strategically
irrelevant turns out in this war let him
keep everything because when the
Japanese try to do Ichigo it's their
biggest offense of the war they're going
right down through Central China because
the United States is cutting off so much
of their Maritime stuff they want to be
able to have Railways all the way
through Central China anyway shankai
Sheek gets wrecked in that maybe if more
of the equipment had been available to
him maybe maybe uh he would have been in
better shape to then uh put on a better
showing in the Civil War also not look
to the Chinese people as a like a Serial
loser and it's not his fault it's
because he's an unindustrialized country
trying to deal with the Japanese whom we
found very difficult to fight so why
wouldn't he find them difficult uh but
we kept Lenley going even after Berlin
had fallen and Stalin used that Aid in
order to even after the first atomic
bomb has dropped that only then does
Stalin start break the non-aggression
pack with Japan and invade menuria so he
basically he had no moral right to
menuria it was the Chinese who had been
doing all the fighting and he gets manua
should have stopped the L lease by by
then right just make sure I think we
stopped it very rapidly at the end of
the war so uh yeah the British were
appalled how rapidly the Len Le AIDS
stop because they desperately needed it
because they'd been wrecked by the war
so yeah we did uh we did cut it off but
I I don't uh you definitely want Nazi
Germany gone and you want to keep
supporting Russia until that happens can
I try another idea on
you yeah um so it seems like one of the
big achievements of modernity is that we
get countries to stop caring about
history is the idea is like look um uh
if you hear people talk about the
Israeli Palestinian conflict on both
sides they'll go back like two 3,000
years about who has rights on the Tucker
Carl interview Putin was talking about
things that happened in like 500 BC uh
and then so the big achievement is just
like look the past is the past whatever
the borders are right now we're going to
enforce those we don't care who who like
claims to have rights to it because of
what happened in 1700s or something that
is modern international law and I don't
know what you'd have to be a lawyer it's
probably a lawyer here actually knows of
when you decide modern international law
begins but certainly
by the time you're getting through World
War World Wars we're in modern
international law and that's the problem
with what Putin's his magic he's working
on Ukraine is they signed multiple times
at the breakup of the Soviet Union and
then afterwards what Ukraine's borders
were and they're violating all that well
have fun with it because the Chinese Can
Play That Game In Reverse on Siberia and
we'll see how happy how how happily that
one ends but I I think there's this real
there is a
realization that the disputes go back
forever and it's like musical chairs
we're now freezing whatever chair you're
in that's it and that's modern
interational law and it turns out that
those uh countries that focus on
territory of ripping it off from someone
else or it's negative sum you're going
to fight over it you're going to destroy
it in the process whatever and the
Europeans um are a great example to us
all of just call it a day uh let
everybody travel go get a rental
property somewhere right and uh run your
businesses you really don't need to own
Luxenberg or whatever it is and what a
hassle uh you you want to offload their
crazy domestic problems anyway and just
run your transactions this is the
miracle of the rules-based order it is
the only way uh to have a uh a a
compounded rapid compounded growth you
go well how's it possible that China had
this rapid growth for a while and their
dictatorship how'd that work it's
because they had the growth when they
cooperated with the international order
when they rejoined the family of Nations
yeah that's when they they prospered
when now she Jinping is going to do a
u-turn on that have fun it we will not
be enriching you mentioned in the
lecture that the the real motivation for
the CCP is to keep itself in power it's
not a democratic system um and if
keeping yourself in power doesn't align
with making our country rich and
therefore it's stay in the international
order if that is a correct mental model
then like what's the pitch to G you know
like why should he abide by the
international order because we want him
to abide by the international order
right and if the idea is like well it's
not going to work out for you like maybe
I don't think it will work out for him
or for the Chinese people that's not a
great but yeah but um there are things
that you just cannot convince other
people one of the another uh key uh
thing in strategy is you can have a very
worthy goal but you need to look at it
carefully and go is it Fe feasible I
don't think it's feasible to make XI Jin
ping change his mind because he's of a
particular uh background and this is
what he believes and he has a whole
bunch of other Chinese people around him
who believe the same thing and it's
we're in a second Cold War it's going to
be a long wait till they change their
mind if you think about gorbachov's
generation they decided gorbachov said
over and over again we cannot live like
this
anymore that realization is that their
standard of living was lousy compared to
the West so clearly they needed to
reform and do things but that was his
decision when and his generation's
decision to reassess and do something
else uh it's going to be a long wait
until the Chinese reassess or the
Russians reassess so then you have to
think about protecting yourself and
working with allies your friends in the
first Cold War the SOS Soviet spit get
getting China to uh oppose the Soviet
Union was a big deal in terms of winning
that war who plays the role that China
played in the first Cold War against
China oh they still play it it's
interesting
so uh
Putin uh has Russia lost the Soviet
Union fractured at precisely the time
that China's Rising so during the Cold
War China's really weak and Russia is in
the dominant position well I guess
that's reversed so Putin is dumping all
his ordinance on Ukraine his whole his
Cold War
stockpile and he is leaving
Siberia uh open wide open to Chinese
predations and I believe Siberia has
precisely the
resources that China covets on lands the
Zar stole and I think there's a big uh
body water out there called Lake Bal
it's 20% of the world's fresh surface
fresh water China is chronically short
of fresh water in North China ball is
the only fix and I think it's flat
enough that you could pipe it around so
I don't think the question is when the
it's not the question of whether the
shei Putin Bromance is going to end it's
when and I assure you the Chinese will
pick it pick the moment that is least
convenient for Putin you think they'd
actually go to war about it or would
they just negotiate bet I bet it'll be
negotiation just you get them in a
corner say okay
buddy uh this is what we want this this
this this and then he'll some things
from them and so sounds like what Jo and
Li tried to do to neru did didn't work
out well uh what do you mean
CH uh Joe and Li absolutely got the
oxide chin Plateau yeah he offered the
deal to n n wouldn't take it it's like
okay uh I don't think uh against they
both have nuclear weapons I don't think
that kind of play is probably the play
to make but as long as Putin's desperate
for whatever uh
for uh ordinance and other things uh he
Putin's getting himself into a grand old
corner you wrote a textbook about
Chinese history from 1644 onwards in
Silicon Valley there's this community
called progress studies and they're very
interested in why the Industrial
Revolution happened how to increase
growth what has the history of progress
been like and one big question is why
didn't China have the indal revolution
first in 1750 they had much higher
fraction of the population much higher
fraction World
output during this period why didn't
they have higher growth rates and come
up with all these Technologies well
there are whole books on the subject
that I haven't read that that look into
this but I would flip it around and go
well the Industrial Revolution starts in
Europe that's the unusual thing so the
question isn't why China didn't but why
Europe did and I have some some guesses
but there really there are very
thoughtful books on this subject you can
go find them and uh and have fun reading
them but if you look at Europe it's a
peninsula and then it's got the
Mediterranean there and so the Europeans
and they've got quite a very good river
system the danu and the Ry and the RAR
all these different rivers and so they
have have always been um a lot of trade
going on and then it was no one's ever
been able to make a big Empire in Europe
stick the Romans did quite well for
quite a bit of time Napoleon tries not
so good Nazis not so good at all and I
guess the French tried on and off and it
didn't succeed so you have all of these
competing countries and I think a lot of
that was essential to the industrial
revolution of having uh you're focusing
on Commerce and you've got a lot of uh
competing places you don't have one big
Empire that can just sit there be fat
dumb and happy that you have to innovate
in order to survive against all these
other little States uh earlier talking
about how North Africa with other region
there's been a bunch of chaos because
people are constantly there's these
insurgencies there's these Civil Wars um
there's these smaller Wars happening all
the time and that causes chaos but if
you look at Europe throughout this
period you know these countries are
constantly at war with each other and
the fact that because of that no one big
Empire forms apparently helps explain
the Industrial Revolution so you know
where it seems to imply that we should
see like a bunch of growth in North
Africa or something it's it's a
tremendous Innovation and look at things
long prior like uh Michelangelo and
things Leonardo da Vinci it's just a lot
of these really bright people and oh uh
yeah it it uh it's it's my guess is it's
related to all of this and I think the
Industrial Revolution doesn't begin in
England and uh the the Industrial
Revolution isn't strictly
industry uh yeah it's about textiles and
steam engines and railroads and things
but it's also about institutions one of
the big things for the British was
insurance so that when you do your
trading vessel and the whole thing sinks
uh you don't bankrupt all your investors
because you got that boat insured and
then banking banking rules so you can't
just rip off everybody's cash and so U
Britain because it's surrounded with the
moat becomes a banking center and
because it's unlikely in a war to have
some alien Army come and just open all
the vaults and take everyone's money so
there are these institutional things and
then the British trading countries like
uh the Dutch
Empire um want to have to be able to
trade in peace so they want people just
follow laws so it's not surprising the
founding father of international law is
a member of the Dutch Republic Hugo
grodus and so it's all a p it's this
gravitation uh inst the Romans are
gravitating towards law and institutions
and then uh these competing places so no
one controls I think the the question is
why do these what's special about Europe
rather than uh why it should have been
somewhere else what what's mysterious
about China is not only that it doesn't
have the industrial revolution first but
its development starts so slow so Japan
copies Western institutions during the
ma reformation and industrializes almost
a century before China is able to do the
same thing and look they're Communists
for a while so it makes sense that
during the ma period or during the Civil
War that would impede development but
even during the Ching Dynasty or
something
it takes a 1980 for them to start
development that just seems awfully slow
well communism is a really lousy system
so they did that uh in the 19th century
they have all these peasant rebellions
where they're literally losing tens of
millions of people that are just
devastating the country so that's why
the 19th century is a lost Century of uh
all of that um going on so it's um it's
hard and then there's another piece
that's hard for the Chinese if you've
been such a successful civilization in
Asia the way they had been they were the
center of everything
culturally uh science uh governmental
institutions you name the name the area
of human achievement and the Chinese
were at the top of it all in Asia uh
with that kind of success it's pretty
hard to reform yourself and so they uh
also fed themselves the Kool-Aid that
the Chinese never absorb foreign ideas
it was always foreigners absorb their
ideas and of course that's nonsense
because they were conquered by Manus and
actually absorbed a lot of Manu in uh
institutions but that's not the story
they're telling whereas the Japanese are
well aware they're absorbing Chinese
institutions originally Western
institutions later and so that isn't uh
antithetical to who the Japanese are
that's interesting that the past
civilizational greatness maybe an
impediment to development yeah it's hard
well also because the way they Define
civilization there's only one everybody
else are barbarians uh people come and
cow to China okay great U but this
doesn't um set you up to learn from
others one of the big D economies you
talk about is uh the difference between
limited and uh total objectives uh how
does bismar illustrate the value of
having limited obes limited and
unlimited objectives yeah bismar does
illustrate that an unlimited objective
is the simple way to look at it is
regime change so if I have an unlimited
objective against you I win the war
you're going to be out of power uh and
as versus I win the war and yeah you
lose a province but you'll be in power
so what bismar does he's very
clever uh well he's operating in an age
of kings and it actually his
achievements illustrates why you truly
don't need royal families are running
the show they're it's breathtakingly
incompetent so initially uh he fights
the Danish War so that's way up North
and it's over these two provinces and he
wants to set his fingers on the scale of
the more Northerly Province because then
that'll give him the rights to March
true troops I think through the more
southerly one to cause up problems later
so War number one's the Danish war no
one thinks too much about it Prussia
gets an extra Province as part of
Denmark was part of Denmark no big deal
but then he fights uh the ostr Prussian
war and then then what he's after is
there're all these little Germanic
States and uh a Austria had dominated a
bunch of them and in that War uh a whole
bunch of them as a result of that war um
he collects a whole bunch of these other
states and no one is really uh paying
attention that he's actually upending
the balance of power in Europe they're
just looking at it's limited he's not
topping the Austrian uh government he's
not toppling the Danish government and
then he fights the franor pressian war
where he takes alas Len which are these
provinces if you look at it's like a
Salient into one country or the other he
takes that and the French never forgive
him and that leads into World War I
later uh but by the time it's over he's
overthrown the balance of power in
Europe that all of a sudden Germany
Prussia which was the weakest of five
great Powers suddenly has a central
position the Germanic states and it owns
the whole thing and um Britain and
others who'd been asleep at the switch
like because they could have weighed in
on the scale at any point in these
things to altered outcomes and they
didn't there's a real reason why and the
the people who are losing out here are
all they're all um monarchies there's a
reason why you don't want to have people
inherit offices they don't tend to be
very good at it actually so World War I
I'm not sure how you explain uh World
War I using limited and uh oh sorry was
is it ultimate objectives or it's
limited or UNL well I there're different
there are Li it's useful and warfare to
think about limited versus unlimited
objectives so if you look at Ukraine
today Putin has one of the most
unlimited kinds of objectives from
Ukraine he not only wants to topple the
Ukrainian government but he wants to
eliminate Ukrainian culture and if you
look up genocide in the dictionary
genocide can mean kill everybody but it
can also mean destroy their culture that
also applies genocide so Hill so Putin
has a very unlimited objective Kev on
the other does not have an unlimited
objective I mean as much as they'd like
Putin to go uh they just they want
Russia to get out of Ukraine right just
get out of Ukrainian territory stay in
Russia that's their objective so the
ukrainians have a limited objective
Putin has an unlimited objective yeah in
World War I I mean maybe other than like
the austrial Hungarian Empire there's
like like Germany doesn't have a
unlimited objective with respect to
France or Russia no it doesn't but it's
still devolves into this you know 10
million people die um it doesn't
although the effect on Russia is to
overthrow the government in fact it
winds up overthrowing one government
after another um I think as that war
goes on and as that you lose a lot of
people uh then you start think then the
objectives become more unlimited where
it's like originally it was just get
back into German territory after a while
it's no we want to overthrow your
government for doing this um on a
different topic so your your name is
Sarah pay yeah when I go on Amazon and I
find your books they're not not listed
as sarra P they're listed under the
author SC M that's correct why is that
well it's interest when I first started
out I just wanted my books to be read by
what the content of the book was I
didn't want it to be read whether I was
male or female just read it for being a
book and then when the first reviews
came out it was he he he he he he he and
this is by Americans doing this and I
thought
wow uh I guess the idea because I wasn't
doing women's his and this was a serious
topic that you know women don't do
serious topics so I guess I'm glad I did
it so it looks like I'm I'm I'm a
Britain right because Britains love all
the the initials and then why do I have
all the initials it's because my dad
named all got from his side of the
family are my three older brothers and
there's me and my mom felt that some
names from her family ought to be uh
dumped on me and so since she there were
three older brothers anyway she had a
lot of extra names going around so she
gave them to me and I had no say in this
when you're training these officers in
the US no world college and you've done
it over many decades has the quality of
these of the people you're training has
it improved decreased over time what's
your class been like they're wonderful
people and also I don't I don't look at
people like
linear I just uh it's a classroom it has
wonderful people in there they're the
Next Generation and I will do everything
I can for every single one of them to
catapult them as far far forward as I
possibly can so that's what it is do
other countries have some equivalent of
the ne War College where they have this
professional C of historians and
strategists who were you know going
through the archives trying to figure
out insights for current leaders oh uh
not all my colleagues P publish much of
anything so there it varies um the naval
war college has always had a few very
aess people and the the most famous
person by far every to work there is
Alfred the Mahan and he's 19th century
well he dies uh early 20 20th century
but he's the guy who when the United
States had been doing Manifest Destiny a
continental uh uh Continental Paradigm
because we're expanding taking territory
all the way to the Pacific and he's the
guy who says you know power and position
in the world really is about trade and
he uh uh writes these enduring books
that have lasted to the present so there
are these occasional people like Alford
the Mahan who are very special and as
for some Cadre of anybody's um we're
just professors we teach uh uh midlevel
and Senior officers and then most of
them never become flag rank with the
kind of leaders you're thinking about so
uh I mean I've talked to the occasional
flag officer but I'm just a minion I
mean um so you started in Soviet studies
and you found yourself in in the Soviet
Union during its fall in '
8889 why was that the field you started
in oh um so um I grew up during the
height of the Cold War and listened to
family dinnertime conversations all
about it and then you listened uh people
describing the Russians as being totally
evil and I thought well I'll learn more
about this I'm curious
and then I realized whoa um it's just
unbelievable how cruel the Russians have
been to each other and others it's like
they're a class by
themselves h i don't make it up so and
then the question is why and learning
more uh about it and then I in history
you do a minor field as well and I think
the typical minor field for Russian
history would be French or German I
thought no I want to learn about China
and just curious and then learn about
China and then I realized that Russia
China have relations but then Japan
always weighs in so then it had to learn
more about Japan so that's where all of
that led and then I also thought I don't
want to be studying the United States
that's where I'm from and I want to
learn about other countries also my
presumptions my B bias would be pretty
bad about the United States or I things
I wouldn't see I thought I'm going to
study other places because I don't have
any family ties I mean I'm not a
descendant of Russian immigrants or
Chinese or Japanese immigrants obviously
uh so these are places that I'm not
related to and just
curious what is the answer to that you
said you were trying to figure out why
the Russians have been so cruel to each
other through history and then
especially I guess after the Communist
Revolution why why is it I don't know
the answer but I know um I was uh I've
just recently read the gulag archipelago
by Alexander sanit and I should have
read it years ago when it came out but I
didn't so I finally read it and what you
re if you read that look at the level of
Cruelty it's mindblowing it isn't simply
that the prisoners are mean to each
other or that the prison guards are mean
to the prisoners or the guards are mean
to each other all that's true and it's
not simply that the civilians outside of
the goog are mean to everybody it's
family members who are mean to people
who are in the goog the neighbors are
mean to the family members who have
anyone who's in the goog and you start
looking going who's not being mean in
this place they're all being mean and
then you look at uh oh um then I haven't
got the the list of all the the words
but then I was reading a lot of Russian
stuff last winter and then maintaining a
list of words in Russian Sila it means
strength or uh coercion in Russia in in
English strength doesn't mean coercion
it just means having power right but in
Russian it also means coercion or deant
it comes from the French which means a
relaxation of pressure the Russian word
what it means is unloading a
gun so it's if you look at their
language it's so coercive and I think
probably if you're living in a really
dangerous piece of real estate which
they are No defensible Boundaries so
you're always fighting people and their
answer to surviving that is to be meaner
than anybody else and uh they just do
scorched Earth you mess with them they
kill everybody and they just don't care
and okay you want to we we have the
modern world now where we can deal with
each other with international law so
none of that stuff is necessary but the
Russians have not pulled from that
tradition and you can read in the
newspaper how absolutely cruel they are
to their men in service right they don't
allow any of them to retreat they've got
the execution battalions behind them so
any kid who turns around uh they're
immediately murdered by their
compatriots who treats their own people
like this
Russians do but other people
don't I mean so talks in that part about
uh this wasn't this is the direct result
of the Communist regime's policy where
if there somebody's an orphan because
their parents went to the ggs if you try
to help the orphan you must be a
sympathizer for the criminals and
therefore you you must also be sent to
the gulags and so like you have these
orphans running around who's like
actually the orphans a lot of them were
um put into orphanages and then they
wound up being set up to join the KGB
and other places so they probably some
of the execution B Battalion people I I
don't know the details but there's some
of that going on and the cruelty in
Russia was remarked by Europeans who are
traveling there in the I don't know 17th
century so it it goes back a long time
about the level of and Peter the Great
back in the day he tortured his son to
death who does that he didn't have a
replacement son either
no um unlike
Solin right um
uh a final question this um this new
project you're doing on the cold war is
it going to be a book is it gonna how
how will it come out slowly um oh I've
been working on it for years it'll be a
a culmination of previous research
starts in 1917 it will end in 1991 is
why 1917 is we may not have noticed that
these crazy Communists in Russia were
serious but they did declare war on the
capital order it is really clear the
documentation is just there and they
were trying to fund people to overthrow
governments in Europe all around the
world immediately this is in the teens
and then certainly in the 20s so it just
because uh they weren't remotely
powerful enough to do it uh but they
were like a what is it a ma phase one
Insurgency where people aren't paying
attention they're like below the radar
what they're doing stuff um and it's
going to be looking at all the
strategies that the Russians played that
we played what medium plowers played of
uh and what worked and what didn't and
it's going to be organized around
Concepts uh to understand these things
so on the one level if I can do it right
it'll be a history of the Cold War from
a from one year to another year so
there's that and then there's another
one about strategy okay people are
trying to achieve objectives and they're
trying different things and integrating
different elements of National Power so
it'll be that and then I what I found
helpful my own career are these Concepts
like limited and unlimited war or
primary adversary primary theater or
frozen conflict or veto player I find
these things helpful and so I'm going to
put as many of those things in there as
possible and it's um I'm of a certain
age so it's passing the Baton to the
Next Generation say this is what I've
managed to figure out in uh as I go putt
putt putt reading and archives and then
others can skim it and see if there's
anything worthwhile if not I tried right
I hope you'll come back on the podcast
once the book is ready thank you hey
everybody I hope you enjoyed that
episode with Sarah this is the first and
the three-part series I did with her
where she distilled the lessons from a
lifetime of deep scholarship the other
two are about Mao and Bushido and I hope
you'll tune into to those as well until
then if you enjoy this episode please
consider sharing it with your friends it
really helps out a ton and if you're
interested in sponsoring a future
episode please reach out at dwares
patel.com SL advertise all right until
the next one see you guys